Philosophy changed dramatically in the first two decades of the twenty-first century. It started caring about society.

At the turn of the century, philosophy was an outlier among humanities disciplines. Across the humanities, the previous generation and seen a re-orientation of research towards work that highlighted issues to do with race and/or gender. But this re-orientation seemed to have passed philosophy by. And then, belatedly, philosophy as a whole changed in just the way that most humanities disciplines had changed some decades earlier.

Twentieth century philosophy had a difficult relationship with society. On the one hand, there were some moves that pointed in the direction of social considerations. Perhaps most notably, Wittgenstein argued that a fully private language would be impossible, so the study of language was essentially a social concern. But the kind of society that you need to have a Wittgensteinian language could be an extremely homogenous, completely egalitarian, one. Issues about power, or identity, aren't yet on the table. And a lot of philosophical work didn't even have this much contact with society. There is a picture, call it solipsism if you don't like it, methodological individualism if you do, that runs through the century from the idealists at its beginning to the realists at its end. Perhaps one could argue that Marxist philosophy at least took power imbalances in society seriously, but the high point of Marxism in philosophy was probably in the mid-century; by the end of the century it too was on the wane.

At this point it might be worth stressing that by philosophy here, I really mean English language philosophy, and English language philosophy as conducted in philosophy departments in English language universities at that. Everything I said in the previous three paragraphs is not really true if you focus on, for example, philosophy in French. But the focus here is going to be on philosophy in English, and indeed in English language universities. Rather than say every time 'philosophy as done in English language universities', I'll just say 'philosophy', and hope with this disclaimer that it isn't too misleading.

And in fact the focus of this book is going to be even narrower than that. It's going to be on philosophy in journals, and in particular, on the citation relations that obtain between works in philosophy journals. That cuts out a lot of work, since philosophers do a lot more things than publish in journals. Most obviously, they write books and book chapters, and those books and book chapters will play an important role in what follows. You can't understand a lot of what's happening in the journals without understanding something about the wider publishing ecosystem that the journals live in. But philosophers write much more than that. They write encyclopaedia articles, and blogs, and novels, and podcasts, and poems, and software, and musical works. This book won't really cover that part of philosophical work at all. 

A full history of philosophy in the first two decades of the twenty-first century would have three tasks that are much harder than any I've set myself here. For one thing, it would have to systematise all those things I mentioned, from new media like blogs and podcats, to artistic works. For another, it would have the unpleasant task of deciding which of these works were really philosophy and which weren't. When you're discussing this period in the history of philosophy, how much time do you spend talking about, for example, Pandoc? And it would have the even harder task of deciding which figures in other academic disciplines, or outside the academy, to include. These seem like urgent questions for the comprehensive historian, and I'm flagging these questions just to note that I'm ducking them.

For all that, philosophy journals are still vital to understanding philosophy in recent times. The journals are only a part of what happens in philosophy, but they are a big part. Most of the important developments in the discipline are at least mirrored in the journals; many of them happen in the journals in the first place. Focussing on journals lets us avoid some of the hard classification questions that I noted in the previous paragraph. Or, at least, it lets us outsource those questions to someone else. And the data we can derive from journals is in better condition than the data we can get from other forms of philosophical writing and expression.

The journals are also more reflective of the biggest trends in the field than I had realised. When I started this project, I didn't really expect that the social turn would be so obvious. It was clear from, e.g., attending conferences, and reading graduate student thesis plans, that something big was happening in the field. But I had the impression that the change was so recent, and the journals so slow to update, that it wouldn't show up in the record of the journals. This was wrong; the change is as clear as day once you look at all the data.

And you have to look at all the data, because we're talking about trends here, not universal generalisations. Before 2000, there were English language philosophers in English language universities who took race and gender seriously. Even post 2020, there are English language philosophers in English language universities who do not. We can't point to this or that individual paper as marking a change in emphasis; any paper could be an outlier.

So that's what this book will do - it will look at the trends in philosophy journals over the first two decades of the twenty-first century. We will look at which topics have been of central importance throughout the period, as well as looking at which topics have risen and fallen in importance. The rises, as we'll see, largely involve debates have to do with social matters, and often with race and/or gender. The falls are interesting too, not least because I'm interested in figuring out why people stopped caring about topics I was spending a lot of time working on in the early 2000s.

But I'll start with a brief overview of the methodology I'm using. There are a lot of ways one could attack the data here, and I'm not going to argue that the way I use is optimal. I don't even believe it's optimal; there were many arbitrary choices that I made. And it's worthwhile having those arbitrary choices on the table before we start.
